Add initial documentation for "new" Daml Shell (#621)
digital-asset/docs.daml.com: docs/3.0.0/docs/tools/daml-shell/index.rst

.. Copyright (c) 2023 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Daml Shell User Guide
#####################

Getting Started
===============

Prerequisites

> -------------

Reviewer: We use these heading symbols:
https://documentation-style-guide-sphinx.readthedocs.io/en/latest/style-guide.html#headings

Daml Shell connects to the PostgreSQL database of a Participant Query
Store (PQS). Please refer to the `PQS
documentation <https://docs.daml.com/query/pqs-user-guide.html>`__ for
setup instructions.

Running Daml Shell
------------------

Daml Shell can be run from a ``jar`` artifact or from a ``Docker`` image
(`tag
list <https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/digitalasset/daml-shell/tags?ordering=last_updated>`__).

> .. code:: sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: sh
```

   docker run -it --net host docker.io/digitalasset/daml-shell:<version-tag> # change --net host if desired

Commands

> --------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
========
```

The easiest way to discover commands is to type the ``help`` command
while Daml Shell is running.

You can recurse into commands by typing

> ``help <command> <sub-command> ...``. Auto-completion at the bottom of
> the screen will suggest possible command options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``help <command> <sub-command> [...]``. Auto-completion at the bottom of
the screen suggests possible command options.
```

.. figure:: images/001-help-output.gif?raw=true
   :alt: Help

::

   > help
   NAME
       help - Display usage instructions

   SYNOPSIS
       help [<command>]

   DESCRIPTION
       CLI to interact with a Scribe database.
       
       Available commands:
         * active - active contracts
         * archives - archived contracts
         * compare-contracts - compare two contracts
         * connect - connect to JDBC URL
         * contract - contract by ID
         * creates - created contracts
         * disconnect - close database connection
         * exercise - choice by event-id
         * exercises - exercised choices
         * go - upper offset bound
         * net-changes - net contract counts
         * set - configure application settings
         * transaction - transaction details

FAQ

> ===

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***

.. _no-archived-contracts:
```

   **Why do I not see any archived contracts?**

> This is likely because PQS has been configured to seed the database from
> the ACS, which does not include historical offsets, archived contracts,
> or exercised choices.
> 
> To see pre-existing archived contracts, the database needs to be seeded
> from the ``Transaction Stream`` or ``Transaction Tree Stream``.
> 
> Solution: Set ``--pipeline-ledger-start`` to ``Genesis`` when running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't see any archived contracts, PQS might be configured to seed the database from
the ACS, which does not include historical offsets, archived contracts,
or exercised choices.

To see pre-existing archived contracts, seed the database 
from the ``Transaction Stream`` or ``Transaction Tree Stream``.

For best results, set ``--pipeline-ledger-start`` to ``Genesis`` when running
```

PQS for the first time (refer to the `PQS
documentation <https://docs.daml.com/query/pqs-user-guide.html>`__ or
``--help`` output).

>    **Why do I not see any choices?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why don't I see any choices?
============================
```

> Choices are only visible on the Ledger API’s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choices are only visible on the Ledger API's
```

``Transaction Tree Stream``. Set ``--pipeline-datasource`` to
``TransactionTreeStream`` when running PQS (refer to the `PQS
documentation <https://docs.daml.com/query/pqs-user-guide.html>`__ or
``--help`` output).

>    **Why do I still not see any choices?**
> 
> See ``Why do I not see any archived contracts`` above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you still don't see choices, see :ref:`no-archived-contracts`
```

>    **Why do I not see any interface views?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why don't I see any interface views?
====================================
```

> Interfaces are only visible on the Ledger API’s ``Transaction Stream``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interfaces are only visible on the Ledger API's ``Transaction Stream``
```

or ACS (not the ``Transaction Tree Stream``).

Set ``--pipeline-datasource`` to ``TransactionStream`` when running PQS
(refer to the `PQS
documentation <https://docs.daml.com/query/pqs-user-guide.html>`__ or
``--help`` output).

>    **Why do all contracts show the same ledger offset?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why do all contracts show the same ledger offset?
=================================================
```

See ``Why do I not see any archived contracts`` above.# Configuration

> Daml Shell can be configured via CLI arguments, environment variables,
> through a configuration file, or interactively using the ``set``
> command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure Daml Shell via CLI arguments, environment variables,
a configuration file, or interactively using the ``set``
command.
```

Command line arguments

> ----------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
======================
```

To see available command line options, run Daml Shell with the
``--help`` flag:

> .. code:: sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: sh
```

   Usage: daml-shell [options]

     -h, --help               prints this usage text
     --config <file>          HOCON config file with settings as key-value pairs
     --wildcard-char <char>   wildcard character used to abbreviate identifiers. Default: "…"
     --identifier-hash-length <length>
                              Number of characters to render for hashes inside identifiers. Default: 20
     --full-identifiers       Disable identifier shortening.
     --identifier-trim-location <leading|middle|trailing>
                              Where to trim long identifiers. Default: "trailing"
     --disable-color          Disable ANSI colored output.

> Configuration file
> ------------------
> 
> These configuration parameters can also be set in a reusable
> configuration file in HOCON (a JSON superset) using the flag
> ``--config <filename>``.
> 
> Example file content:
> 
> .. code:: hocon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configuration file
==================

You can set Daml Shell parameters in a reusable
configuration file in HOCON (a JSON superset) using the flag
``--config <filename>``.

Example file content:

.. code-block:: text
```

Reviewer: I chose `text` for now, but you can use any of the Pygments lexers: https://pygments.org/docs/lexers/

   # file: application.conf
   oldest = "start"
   latest = "end"
   identifier-hash-length = 20
   wildcard-char = "…"
   identifier-trim-location = "trailing"
   full-identifiers = false
   disable-color = false

> Interactively
> -------------
> 
> Settings can be configured interactively using the ``set`` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interactive configuration
=========================

You can configure settings interactively using the ``set`` command.
```

Example:

::

   > set identifier-hash-length full 
   Disabled identifier shortening

> Type ``help set`` or ``help set <setting>`` to find out more about
> specific settings.# Usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Type ``help set`` or ``help set <setting>`` to learn more about
specific settings.
```

> 
> This document describes some basic usage examples.
> 
> Setup
> ~~~~~
> 
> Please refer to the `Getting Started <001-getting-started.md>`__ guide.
> 
> Connecting
> ~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> We connect by entering the JDBC URL of our PQS postgres database. For
> example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Usage
*****

This section provides some basic usage examples.

Connecting
==========

To connect, enter the JDBC URL of your PQS PostgreSQL database. For
example:
```

::

   > connect jdbc:postgresql://localhost/postgres?user=postgres&password=postgres

The status bar shows the connected status, the session offset range, and
the datastore offset range.

> .. figure:: images/003-connect.gif?raw=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. figure:: images/003-connect.gif
```

   :alt: Connect

Offsets

> ~~~~~~~
> 
> By default, offsets have leading zeroes removed. To see all identifiers
> in full, including contract ID hashes, you can run
> ``set identifier-hash-length full``, or set a custom length limit for
> hashes by running, for example, ``set identifier-hash-length 15``.
> 
> Depending on the ledger implementation, offsets may be in hexadecimal
> format.
> 
> The available offset range from the data-store is given in the
> ``Datastore range`` status field. The offset range for Daml Shell to use
> to display payload counts and summaries is given by the
> ``Session range`` status field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=======

By default, offsets have leading zeroes removed. To see all identifiers
in full, including contract ID hashes, run
``set identifier-hash-length full`` or set a custom length limit for
hashes by running, for example, ``set identifier-hash-length 15``.

Depending on the ledger implementation, offsets may be in hexadecimal
format.

The available offset range from the datastore is specified in the
``Datastore range`` status field. The offset range for Daml Shell to use
to display payload counts and summaries is specified in the
``Session range`` status field.
```

You can move to different offsets by using the ``go`` command, which is
an alias for ``set latest``. ``go -2`` (go backward two offsets),
``go +2`` (go forward two offsets), ``go forward`` (alias ``go next``),
``go back`` (alias ``go backward``), ``go start``, and ``go end`` are
all examples of valid commands.

The ``net-changes`` command summarizes the changes effected by the
transaction at the current offset. The ``net-changes`` command also
accepts a target ``offset`` argument, or two ``offset`` arguments to
compare between (see ``help net-changes``).

::

   > net-changes 
   +3 PingPong:Cash [89a08f0324025f1…]
   -3 PingPong:CashTransferProposal [89a08f0324025f1…]
   +3 PingPong:IAsset [89a08f0324025f1…]
   -3 PingPong:IAssetTransferProposal [89a08f0324025f1…]

> .. figure:: images/003-offset-commands.gif?raw=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. figure:: images/003-offset-commands.gif
```

   :alt: Connect

> Summary information
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Summary information
===================
```

Commands such as ``active``, ``archives``, ``creates``, and
``exercises`` can be used without argument to see payload counts by

> fully qualified identifier names. You can run ``help <command>`` to find
> out what each of them does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fully qualified identifier names. For details, run ``help <command>``.
```

::

   > active
   ┌─────────────────────────────────────────┬───────────┬───────┐
   │ Identifier                              │ Type      │ Count │
   ╞═════════════════════════════════════════╪═══════════╪═══════╡
   │ PingPong:Cash [89a08f0324025f1…]        │ Template  │     6 │
   ├─────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────┼───────┤
   │ PingPong:IAsset [89a08f0324025f1…]      │ Interface │     6 │
   ├─────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────┼───────┤
   │ PingPong:IBounceable [89a08f0324025f1…] │ Interface │     2 │
   ├─────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────┼───────┤
   │ PingPong:Ping [89a08f0324025f1…]        │ Template  │     2 │
   └─────────────────────────────────────────┴───────────┴───────┘

> .. figure:: images/003-summary-commands.gif?raw=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. figure:: images/003-summary-commands.gif

   :alt: Summary commands

> Payloads by fully qualified name
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> Adding a fully qualified name (FQN) after any of the ``active``,
> ``archives``, ``creates``, or ``exercises`` commands will list all
> applicable payloads for that FQN.
> 
> The package ID can be included in the FQN, in which case only payloads
> from that particular package will be returned, e.g.
> 
> ::
> 
>    > active 89a08f0324025f1254f09edc0195ca24459c6302e88d2b9f636d2be5a615d1f1:PingPong:Ping
> 
> or the package ID can be omitted, in which case payloads from all
> package IDs are returned, as long as they have the same name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Payloads by fully qualified name
================================

Specify a fully qualified name (FQN) with the command ``active``,
``archives``, ``creates``, or ``exercises`` to list all
applicable payloads for that FQN.

To return payloads from a particular package only, include the package ID in
the FQN:

::

   > active 89a08f0324025f1254f09edc0195ca24459c6302e88d2b9f636d2be5a615d1f1:PingPong:Ping

If you omit the package ID, payloads from all
package IDs are returned, as long as they have the same name.
```

   │ Created at │ Contract ID      │ Contract Key │ Payload                                                                            │
   ╞════════════╪══════════════════╪══════════════╪════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╡
   │ 8          │ 0022e89289bda36… │              │ label: one                                                                         │
   │            │                  │              │ owner: Alice::12209038d324bf70625c580267d5957cb4c4c03bb7bce294713b48151a4a088afd3b │
   ├────────────┼──────────────────┼──────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
   │ a          │ 0093dce322a08c8… │              │ label: one copy updated                                                            │
   │            │                  │              │ owner: Alice::12209038d324bf70625c580267d5957cb4c4c03bb7bce294713b48151a4a088afd3b │
   └────────────┴──────────────────┴──────────────┴────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

> The auto-completion provides both variants, FQN with and without package
> IDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The auto-completion provides both FQN variants (with and without package
ID).
```

> Contract lookup
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> Contracts can be looked up by contract ID. Interface views will also be
> displayed, if any.
> 
> The contract ID can be copied with the wildcard character (here “…”)
> included. The wildcard character will be expanded to any matching ID.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contract lookup
===============

You can look up contracts by contract ID. Interface views are also
displayed, if any.

The contract ID can be copied with the wildcard character (here "...")
included. The wildcard character will be expanded to any matching ID.

```

   ╓──────────────╥─────────────────────────────────────────╖
   ║ Identifier   ║ PingPong:IBounceable [89a08f0324025f1…] ║
   ╟──────────────╫─────────────────────────────────────────╢
   ║ Type         ║ Interface                               ║
   ╟──────────────╫─────────────────────────────────────────╢
   ║ Created at   ║ a                                       ║
   ╟──────────────╫─────────────────────────────────────────╢
   ║ Archived at  ║ <active>                                ║
   ╟──────────────╫─────────────────────────────────────────╢
   ║ Contract ID  ║ 0093dce322a08c8…                        ║
   ╟──────────────╫─────────────────────────────────────────╢
   ║ Event ID     ║ #122099ed6675f2e…:1                     ║
   ╟──────────────╫─────────────────────────────────────────╢
   ║ Contract Key ║                                         ║
   ╟──────────────╫─────────────────────────────────────────╢
   ║ Payload      ║ ilabel: view one copy updated           ║
   ╙──────────────╨─────────────────────────────────────────╜

You can also compare two contracts in a ``diff``-style output format
using the ``compare-contracts <id1> <id2>`` command.

> .. figure:: images/003-compare-contracts.gif?raw=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. figure:: images/003-compare-contracts.gif
```

   :alt: compare-contracts

> Transaction lookup
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transaction lookup
==================
```

> Transactions can be looked up either by transaction ID or by offset,
> i.e., by running ``transaction <transaction-id>`` or
> ``transaction at <offset>`` respectively. Note the “``at``” when looking
> up by offset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can look up transactions by either transaction ID or offset,
by running ``transaction <transaction-id>`` or
``transaction at <offset>``, respectively. Note the ``at`` syntax when looking
up by offset.
```

> The current transaction, at the head of the session offset range, can be
> displayed by just running ``transaction``.
> 
> The ``transaction`` command will show which contracts were created,
> which ones were archived, and what choices were exercised. It will also
> display the event ID for each of those events, as well as contract IDs
> and package IDs!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To display the current transaction at the head of the session offset range,
run ``transaction``.

The ``transaction`` command shows which contracts were created,
which were archived, and what choices were exercised. It also
displays the event ID for each of those events, as well as contract IDs
and package IDs.
```

> .. figure:: images/003-transactions.gif?raw=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. figure:: images/003-transactions.gif
```

   :alt: compare-contracts

Exercise lookup

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
===============
```

Exercised choices can be looked up in the same manner as contracts,
except that exercises are looked up by their event ID rather than by a
contract ID. The commands for summaries and lookups mirror the
functionality available for contracts.

> For example, exercise counts by FQN can be looked up like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can look up exercise counts by FQN:
```

::

   > exercises 
   ┌───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┬───────────────┬───────┐
   │ Identifier                                                    │ Type          │ Count │
   ╞═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╪═══════════════╪═══════╡
   │ PingPong:AcceptIAssetTransferProposal [89a08f0324025f1254f0…] │ Consuming     │     6 │
   ├───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────┼───────┤
   │ PingPong:ChangeLabel [89a08f0324025f1254f0…]                  │ Consuming     │     1 │
   ├───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────┼───────┤
   │ PingPong:Copy [89a08f0324025f1254f0…]                         │ Non-consuming │     1 │
   └───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┴───────────────┴───────┘

> Exercises for a specific choice can be looked up like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can look up exercises for a specific choice:
```

   │ 12     │ 00bc1500e6c781559ad1… │          │ 00a8753f0ccbc503ab393dae99d7ca982b15f1429b61739c03dad299d123f21e5aca02122090c1f0e10da810f4ee1a961a91701863dd22f9f360f676725540929069cee17e │
   ├────────┼───────────────────────┼──────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
   │ 12     │ 001495835b90270f9699… │          │ 00ea78410739637ad2460e65ddf9382d2eef8d9a33a2ce38f912eaba065a342ebbca021220f5ffe34193c016a242a41735bf9670cf585a61e7423766bedbb15e92c6ea83be │
   ├────────┼───────────────────────┼──────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
   │ 12     │ 00844b2f4a2fb8ff73fe… │          │ 00bc875c5ee7cc6adb11a48a2cb4272e4374affa94f23cb8a7b358946f3bd5c4b4ca0212209cb5521de33a5a2d931e0b97a312753d772e55529bc086e0fb75376123131b6f │
   └────────┴───────────────────────┴──────────┴────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

> Individual exercises can be looked up by event ID:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To look up individual exercises, use the event ID:
```

   ╟──────────────╫────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╢
   ║ Parent       ║                                                                                                                                            ║
   ╟──────────────╫────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╢
   ║ Argument     ║                                                                                                                                            ║
   ╟──────────────╫────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╢
   ║ Result       ║ 00a8753f0ccbc503ab393dae99d7ca982b15f1429b61739c03dad299d123f21e5aca02122090c1f0e10da810f4ee1a961a91701863dd22f9f360f676725540929069cee17e ║
   ╙──────────────╨────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╜

> Setting offset bounds
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting offset bounds
=====================
```

The output of ``creates [<fqn>]`` and ``archives [<fqn>]`` can be
bounded by ``set oldest`` (for the lower bound) and ``set latest`` (for
the upper bound). ``go`` is an alias for ``set latest``.

> .. figure:: images/003-bounded-lookup.gif?raw=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. figure:: images/003-bounded-lookup.gif
```

   :alt: bounded lookup

> Finding transactions that created/archived a contract
> =====================================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finding transactions that created or archived a contract
========================================================
```

> Once you know the offsets that a contract was created at, for example by
> using the ``archives`` command, you can look up the relevant
> transactions using the ``transaction at <offset>`` command.
> 
> .. figure:: images/003-from-contract-to-transactions.gif?raw=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you know the offsets that a contract was created at (for example, by
using the ``archives`` command), you can look up the relevant
transactions using the ``transaction at <offset>`` command.

.. figure:: images/003-from-contract-to-transactions.gif
```
